[decisions] sequences of kdbGet and kdbSet operations (#4574)
ElektraInitiative/libelektra: doc/decisions/operation_sequences.md

# Operation sequences

## Problem

The current public API allows various kind of sequences of `kdbGet` and `kdbSet` calls.
There is no real guideline of allowed and/or prohibited sequences, other than `kdbGet` for a certain parent key must be called before `kdbSet`:

- initially after `kdbOpen`
- after conflict errors in `kdbSet`

While researching ways to do change tracking, we discovered that some sequences are currently legal but might be problematic.
This issue not only effects change tracking, but may cause problems for other use cases too.

Currently, plugins may (and in the case of notification plugins actually do) assume that a `kdbSet` operation for a certain parent key always directly follows the `kdbGet` operation for that same key. 
However, this is not enforced in any way within Elektra, nor is it documented that it should.

So in reality, as illustrated by the example, `kdbGet` and `kdbSet` of different parent keys might be interwoven.

```c
Key * keyA = ...;
Key * keyB = ...;
// assume that neither A below B nor B below A
KeySet * a = ...;
KeySet * b = ...;
kdbGet(kdb, a, keyA); // (A)
kdbGet(kdb, b, keyB); // (B)
kdbSet(kdb, a, keyA); // (C)
```

> - At point `(A)` the plugins internally store the KeySet for key `a`
> - At point `(B)` the plugins internally override the stored KeySet with the KeySet for key `b`
> - At point `(C)` plugins that do change-tracking will generate a wrong changeset for key `a` if they assume that the previous `kdbGet` operation was also for key `a`

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- At point `(A)` the plugins internally store the data below the parent `keyA`
- At point `(B)` the same thing happens for the data below the parent `keyB`.
  This **replaces** the data from `(A)`.
- At point `(C)` plugins that do change-tracking need to generate a changeset.
  The changeset will be calculated between the stored data and the new data in the KeySet `a`.
   Because the stored data is now from `(B)` and **not** from `(A)`, this changeset will be wrong.
   The calculation will wrongly assume everything in KeySet `b` was removed and everything in KeySet `a` is newly added.
```

   Developers might still wrongly mix the sequences, but they will get an error and have to fix it.

   - Adding a `Key * lastGetParent` to `struct _KDB`
   - Doing `keyCopy (handle->lastGetParent, parentKey, KEY_CP_NAME)` in `kdbGet`
   - And checking `keyIsSameOrBelow (handle->lastGetParent, parentKey) == 1` in `kdbSet`

3. Enforce that `ks` used in `kdbSet` is the same as in the last `kdbGet`
   Similar to (2), but we check for the pointer of the `KeySet` instead of having a copy of the parent key, which saves some memory.

   - Adding a `KeySet * lastGetKs` to `struct _KDB`
   - Doing `handle->lastGetKs = ks` in `kdbGet`
   - And checking `lastGetKs == ks` in `kdbSet`

4. Change the API so that a single instance of KDB can only contain a single instance of a `KeySet`.
   This solution completely eliminates problematic sequences.
   ```c
   // same as before but uses handle->data instead of the ks argument
   int kdbGet (KDB * handle, Key * parentKey);
   // same as before but uses handle->data instead of the ks argument
   int kdbSet (KDB * handle, Key * parentKey);

   KeySet * kdbData (KDB * handle) {
       return handle->data;
   }
   ```

> 5. Allow arbitrary sequences and let each plugin deal with it on a case-by-case basis.

Reviewer: This description make this option sound far too easy. Please explain more details (deep-dup per parent, in every plugin, etc.). You should also mention that we could keep the deepDup'ed data in `KDB` instead of separately in every plugin and provide an API for plugins to access this.

Author: Done

The current public API allows various kind of sequences of `kdbGet` and `kdbSet` calls.
There is no real guideline of allowed and/or prohibited sequences, other than `kdbGet` for a certain parent key must be called before `kdbSet`:

- initially after `kdbOpen`
- after conflict errors in `kdbSet`

While researching ways to do change tracking, we discovered that some sequences are currently legal but might be problematic.
This issue not only effects change tracking, but may cause problems for other use cases too.

Currently, plugins may (and in the case of notification plugins actually do) assume that a `kdbSet` operation for a certain parent key always directly follows the `kdbGet` operation for that same key. 
However, this is not enforced in any way within Elektra, nor is it documented that it should.

So in reality, as illustrated by the example, `kdbGet` and `kdbSet` of different parent keys might be interwoven.

This is problematic, as plugins may store the result of `kdbGet` and use the stored data in the following `kdbSet` to calculate a changeset.
Plugins have to do this, as there isn't any other Elektra-provided mechanism currently to do change-tracking for them.

> This problem is illustrated by the following example:

Reviewer: So you want a concrete examples of for `keyA`/`keyB`, the contents of `a`/`b` and the existing mountpoints?

KeySet * b = ...;
kdbGet(kdb, a, keyA); // (A)
kdbGet(kdb, b, keyB); // (B)
kdbSet(kdb, a, keyA); // (C)
```

- At point `(A)` the plugins internally store the data below the parent `keyA`.
- At point `(B)` the same thing happens for the data below the parent `keyB`.
  This **replaces** the data from `(A)`.
- At point `(C)` plugins that do change-tracking need to generate a changeset.
  The changeset will be calculated between the stored data and the new data in the KeySet `a`.
  Because the stored data is now from `(B)` and **not** from `(A)`, this changeset will be wrong.
  The calculation will wrongly assume everything in KeySet `b` was removed and everything in KeySet `a` is newly added.

To further illustrate the problem, assume KDB contains the following keys:

```
user:/a/brightness
user:/a/saturation
user:/b/background
user:/b/foreground
```

`keyA` will be `user:/a`, `keyB` will be `user:/b`.
Right after `(B)`, the two keysets are filled with the following values:

| `a`                  | `b`                  |
|----------------------|----------------------|
| `user:/a/brightness` | `user:/b/background` |
| `user:/a/saturation` | `user:/b/foreground` |

> For a plugin that does change-tracking as described above, the plugin will then wrongly calculate the following changeset at `(C)`:

Reviewer 2: > change-tracking as described above

There is not really a change tracking described above.

Please always use same spelling for "change tracking".

Author: Yes this was meant.

| Added Keys           | Removed Keys         | Modified Keys |
|----------------------|----------------------|---------------|
| `user:/a/brightness` | `user:/b/background` |               |
| `user:/a/saturation` | `user:/b/foreground` |               |

> This is obviously wrong. Looking at the example, the changeset should be empty, as nothing has been changed in keyset `a`.

Reviewer 2: Did you actually test this, e.g. with:

```
kdb mount a.ecf user:/a logchange
kdb mount b.ecf user:/b logchange
kdb set user:/a/brightness 1
kdb set user:/a/saturation 1
kdb set user:/b/background 1
kdb set user:/b/foreground 1
```

Or do you mean with other change tracking? Please be more specific and say what you actually checked.

Reviewer: > e.g. with: [...]

This sequence would NOT be the sequence given above. Each `kdb set` is a `kdbGet` immediately followed by a `kdbSet` with the same KeySet and `parentKey`. That is the one case that always works without issues.

However, I can tell we don't need to test it. This is just a logical conclusion from what is stated above.

1. In line 56-59 we defined the contents of `a` and `b`
2. The last `kdbGet` at (B) used `b`, so that is "theirs"
3. The the current `kdbSet` at (C) uses `a`, so that is "ours"
4. Since "theirs" and "ours" are distinct, the changeset is just:
    - remove everything from "theirs"
    - add everything from "ours"

That's obviously wrong, because "theirs" is simply the wrong data. It should be the contents of `a` at (A), which would give the correct empty changeset.

All this follows from one single fact: Plugins store data internally that is entirely replaced during each `kdbGet` and then compared against during `kdbSet`.

Author: @markus2330 I have added a reproducible example

There is no real guideline of allowed and/or prohibited sequences, other than `kdbGet` for a certain parent key must be called before `kdbSet`:

- initially after `kdbOpen`
- after conflict errors in `kdbSet`

While researching ways to do change tracking, we discovered that some sequences are currently legal but might be problematic.
This issue not only effects change tracking, but may cause problems for other use cases too.

Currently, notification plugins assume that a `kdbSet` operation for a certain parent key always directly follows the `kdbGet` operation for that same key.
However, this is not enforced in any way within Elektra, nor is it documented that it should.

In applications, `kdbGet` and `kdbSet` of different parent keys might be interwoven in any way.
This is problematic, as plugins may store the result of `kdbGet` and use the stored data in the following `kdbSet` to calculate a changeset.
Plugins have to do this, as there isn't any other Elektra-provided mechanism currently to do change tracking for them.

Assume KDB contains the following keys:

```
user:/a/brightness
user:/a/saturation
user:/b/background

> user:/b/foreground

Reviewer: I disagree. If we remove this, the reproducible example must be extended. I want to know what the problem is **without** having to run some code to see what happens. Also as you said yourself, the reproducible example only shows the problem for `dbus`. This explains the problem in general and shows it is not just an issue in `dbus`. 

Maybe swapping the order would be better. First show the concrete example, _then_ explain the general issue behind.

> user:/b/foreground

Reviewer 2: In the reproducible example exactly the same keys are listed but as full command that can be copy&pasted (if someone wants). Saying several times the same does not add clarity. But I agree that some statements in the first example need to be kept.

> user:/b/foreground

Reviewer: True, listing the same keys as used in `kdb set` isn't needed. But an explanation of what the C code does, would be needed, if there is no general explanation of the problem.

```

The following sequence will lead to change tracking problems:

> ```c

Author: The reproducible example has too much stuff in it, that is non-essential for this problem, e.g. memory management code. I think having the general description of the problem with some pseudo-code and then the reproducible example works better for understanding the problem.

> ```c

Author: I have removed it in 5e9a662b

> ```c

Reviewer 2: Actually best would be to have the test code somewhere in tests/ (DISABLED_ as it currently fails).

	kdbSet (handle, a, keyA);

	ksDel (a);
	ksDel (b);
	keyDel (keyA);
	keyDel (keyB);
	keyDel (root);

	kdbClose (handle, 0);
	return 0;
}
```

You will notice the following output of `dbus-monitor`:

```
signal time=1666993066.749997 sender=:1.364 -> destination=(null destination) serial=2 path=/org/libelektra/configuration; interface=org.libelektra; member=KeyAdded
   string "user:/a/brightness"
signal time=1666993066.750161 sender=:1.364 -> destination=(null destination) serial=3 path=/org/libelektra/configuration; interface=org.libelektra; member=KeyAdded
   string "user:/a/saturation"
signal time=1666993066.750551 sender=:1.364 -> destination=(null destination) serial=4 path=/org/libelektra/configuration; interface=org.libelektra; member=KeyAdded
   string "user:/a/test"
signal time=1666993066.750628 sender=:1.364 -> destination=(null destination) serial=5 path=/org/libelektra/configuration; interface=org.libelektra; member=KeyDeleted
   string "user:/b/background"
signal time=1666993066.750866 sender=:1.364 -> destination=(null destination) serial=6 path=/org/libelektra/configuration; interface=org.libelektra; member=KeyDeleted

>    string "user:/b/foreground"

Reviewer: Since we also know **why** `dbus` behaves like this (and in fact knew that before the example), we can already say that it affects all plugins that store the `KeySet` during `kdbGet` and compare against `kdbSet`. The exact behaviour will depend on the plugin.

>    string "user:/b/foreground"

Reviewer 2: The problem is not that either of us doesn't know it. The problem is that it is not properly written in the decision.

>    string "user:/b/foreground"

Reviewer: > The problem is not that either of us doesn't know it.

Your question was phrased in a way that I wasn't sure, whether you know the answer or not. 

> The problem is that it is not properly written in the decision.

IMO the general section ("Assume KDB contains the following keys:" etc.) shows pretty well that this is a general problem.

But as I said in another comment, maybe swapping the other (concrete example first, general issue afterwards) would make it more clear.

>    string "user:/b/foreground"

Author: I show that the same behavior is also present in `logchange` in 7784ea82

   - Adding a `Key * lastGetParent` to `struct _KDB`
   - Doing `keyCopy (handle->lastGetParent, parentKey, KEY_CP_NAME)` in `kdbGet`
   - And checking `keyIsSameOrBelow (handle->lastGetParent, parentKey) == 1` in `kdbSet`

3. Enforce that `ks` used in `kdbSet` is the same as in the last `kdbGet`
   Similar to (2), but we check for the pointer of the `KeySet` instead of having a copy of the parent key, which saves some memory.

   - Adding a `KeySet * lastGetKs` to `struct _KDB`
   - Doing `handle->lastGetKs = ks` in `kdbGet`
   - And checking `lastGetKs == ks` in `kdbSet`

4. Change the API so that a single instance of KDB can only contain a single instance of a `KeySet`.
   This solution completely eliminates problematic sequences.

   ```c
   // same as before but uses handle->data instead of the ks argument
   int kdbGet (KDB * handle, Key * parentKey);
   // same as before but uses handle->data instead of the ks argument
   int kdbSet (KDB * handle, Key * parentKey);

   KeySet * kdbData (KDB * handle) {
       return handle->data;
   }
   ```

5. Allow arbitrary sequences and let each plugin deal with it on a case-by-case basis.

> 

Reviewer: This is just option 1, with the additional bit that all sequences are allowed.

The change tracking part is being discussed in #4554. _You_ wanted to split the two decisions...

Also: Technically "arbitrary sequences" is not possible anyway, because we already have a constraint:

Before calling `kdbSet (kdb, ksX, parentX)` there must have been a call to `kdbGet (kdb, ksY, parentY)`, such that
- `parentX` is below `parentY` OR
- `parentX` and `parentY` are stored in the same backend.

That's needed so that the backends are correctly initialized.

So what this option should say is to make the above constraint the only one.

> 

Reviewer 2: I agree, I corrected my suggestion to not contain "arbitrary sequences".

> Before calling kdbSet (kdb, ksX, parentX) there must have been a call to kdbGet (kdb, ksY, parentY), such that

Not necessarily. We could have a kdbSet which internally does a kdbGet. But I don't think it should be done in the low-level API. Instead it should be in a higher-level API, also doing necessary merges on conflicts.

> 

Author: I've added this alternative.

# Operation sequences

## Problem

The current public API allows various kind of sequences of `kdbGet` and `kdbSet` calls.
There is no real guideline of allowed and/or prohibited sequences, other than `kdbGet` for a certain parent key must be called before `kdbSet`:

- initially after `kdbOpen`
- after conflict errors in `kdbSet`

We discovered that some sequences are currently legal but problematic for change tracking and maybe also other use cases.

> Currently, notification plugins assume that a `kdbSet` operation for a certain parent key always directly follows the `kdbGet` operation for that same key.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Currently, notification plugins assume that a `kdbSet` operation for a certain parent key always follows the `kdbGet` operation for that same key, without a different `kdbGet` in between.
```

"directly" suggests `kdbGet (...); kdbSet (...);` without _any code_ in between, which obviously doesn't do anything.

However, this is not enforced in any way within Elektra, nor is it documented that it should.

In applications, `kdbGet` and `kdbSet` of different parent keys might be interwoven in any way.
This is problematic, as plugins may store the result of `kdbGet` and use the stored data in the following `kdbSet` to calculate a changeset.
Plugins have to do this, as there isn't any other Elektra-provided mechanism currently to do change tracking for them.

Note, that erroneous behaviour only occurs if plugins are used globally, i.e. as `notification-send` hook plugins.

> If they are mounted for specific backends (via `kdb mount`), this behaviour will not occur as plugins from different backends are isolated.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
If they are mounted for specific backends (via `kdb mount`), this behaviour will not occur as plugins from different backends are isolated and backends are treated as an atomic unit with a single parent key.
```

Just isolating them wouldn't be enough, if two calls could still have different parent keys or do different partial reads.

### Reproducible Example

The following example will demonstrate the problematic sequence as real, runnable code.
This example will show the erroneous behaviour for the `dbus` and `logchange` plugins, if used as `notification-send` hooks.

> These both plugins just serve as a general demonstration, and there may be more plugins that do change tracking this way.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These plugins both just serve as a general demonstration, and there may be more plugins that exhibit the problematic behaviour.
```

Could be something other than change tracking in theory.

> # KDB operation sequences

Reviewer 2: Should be same as file. I think `Illegal Sequences` are a better name.

Author: It's not. This decision is not pureley about illegal sequences, but as @kodebach mentiones also about the semantical meaning of allowed sequences.

Reviewer 2: I am not sure if this is a good idea. If there is also unclear semantics, this should be in separate decisions. Are these semantics also of relevance for #4554? It is important that we find out the connections between the decisions, so that we solve them in the right order.

Btw. you are doing a great job here. This is really an operation in the heart of Elektra. :heart_decoration:

Reviewer: See my recent response in the root thread of this PR. The "semantics" don't refer to the semantics of `kdbGet`/`kdbSet` on their own, but purely to the semantics of sequences, i.e. how they interact when used on the same handle.

## Problem

The current public API allows various kind of sequences of `kdbGet` and `kdbSet` calls.
There is no real guideline of allowed and/or prohibited sequences, other than `kdbGet` for a certain parent key must be called before `kdbSet`:

- initially after `kdbOpen`
- after conflict errors in `kdbSet`

> While researching ways to do change tracking, we discovered that some sequences are currently legal, but might be problematic.

Reviewer 2: Comma before but usually only when there are two full sentences connected.

```suggestion
While researching ways to do change tracking, we discovered that some sequences are currently legal but might be problematic.
```

This issue not only effects change tracking, but may cause problems for other use cases too.

```c
Key * keyA = ...;
Key * keyB = ...;
// assume that neither A below B nor B below A
KeySet * a = ...;
KeySet * b = ...;
kdbGet(kdb, a, keyA); // (A)
kdbGet(kdb, b, keyB); // (B)
kdbSet(kdb, a, keyA); // (C)
```

- At point `(A)` the plugins internally store the KeySet for key `a`

> - At point `(B)` the plugins internally override the stored the KeySet with the KeySet for key `b`

Reviewer 2: Sentence is broken.

> - At point `(C)` they will generate a wrong changeset for key `a`

Reviewer 2: "they"? The plugins? Can you please give an example how it would be wrong.

## Constraints

> - As far as possible, we must check for illegal sequences and raise an error when a constraint is violated

Reviewer 2: Please stick to terminology, otherwise the sentences are becoming confusing. Give constraints a number so that you refer to it.

```suggestion
1. As far as possible, we must check for illegal sequences and raise an error when an illegal sequence occurs
```

## Assumptions

1.
2.
3.

## Considered Alternatives

1. Document which sequences are allowed without raising errors in all illegal cases.
   Least-effort approach, but at least offers some transparency for developers.

>    Developers utilizing Elektra can still ignore it, and may cause problems in certain setups without knowing.

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
   Developers utilizing Elektra can still ignore it, and may cause problems in certain setups without knowing.
   (Violates Constraint 1)
```

2. Enforce that the `parentKey` used in `kdbSet` is below the one used in the last `kdbGet`.
   If this is not the case, `kdbSet` will abort and report an error in `parentKey`.
   Developers might still wrongly mix the sequences, but they will get an error and have to fix it.

>    - Adding a `Key * lastGetParent` to `struct _KDB`

Reviewer 2: Don't like this.

Reviewer 2: I don't like that we get too much state/too many illegal sequences. To e.g. force the same parent key or keyset breaks the whole idea of separating these 3 classes.

Reviewer: It is not too bad. If you always do a `kdbGet`, then modify the keyset and then do `kdbSet` it works fine. In fact reducing the time between `kdbGet` and `kdbSet` is good for avoiding conflicts anyway. There just can't be an unrelated `kdbGet` in between.

However, I agree, if there is a better solution, we should avoid additional restrictions.

Reviewer 2: I agree it is the least-annoying restriction. But IIUC it always needs a ksDup on the user-side, so that a 3-way merge can be done if kdbSet fails.

@atmaxinger can you please give a small example how you imagined normal kdbSet usage (with conflict handling) to be with this restriction?

Author: > But IIUC kdbSet would always need a ksDup on the user-side, so that a 3-way merge can be done 

Where are you getting this idea from?
What does `ksDup` have to do with this alternative?
Why do you bring the 3-way merge into this?

Please answer this questions, I don't have any ideas on how to address this in the decision file.

> (with conflict handling)

What conflicts do you mean with that? 

> as it only decreases the likelyhood but doesn't give you any guarantee.

Aggree, but IMHO discussing merge conflict strategies in this decision is a bit off-topic.

Author: I have added a sample for kdbSet usage in 49c20d33

Reviewer: > IIUC kdbSet would always need a ksDup on the user-side, so that a 3-way merge can be done

I'm not sure how the 3-way merge would be different for this option. From what I understand, you need at least **two** `ksDup` and possibly even a `ksDeepDup` to be on the safe side. To do a 3-way merge you need 3 keysets: base, ours and theirs. AFAIK "ours" is what we gave the `kdbSet` that failed. Then we do another `kdbGet` which gives us "theirs". And "base" is basically what this whole decision is about. For things to be correct, it must the data returned by the last `kdbGet` that **matched** the failed `kdbSet`.

> What conflicts do you mean with that?

I think in this case, it refers to the kinds of conflicts that make a `kdbSet` fail. The recommended way to resolve these is with a 3-way merge. Although I don't think we have a full example with explanations anywhere that definitely works in all cases.

The simplest case here is, if a file is edited on disk between `kdbGet` and `kdbSet`.

>  IIUC we normally have failures anymore in kdbSet but a successful kdbGet would tell us about conflicts...

No idea what this is supposed to mean...

Reviewer 2: I am referring to examples/kdbset.c, what we currently recommend to do when someone wants to call `kdbSet`.

We are discussing about restrictions in sequences, so for me the question comes up if these examples still would work.

> What does ksDup have to do with this alternative?

See line 57 of examples/kdbset.c

https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/blob/664bc1d21410afe92dfc3eb9b5921a017176e8fa/examples/kdbset.c#L57

with the current pattern (no kdbGet needed before), one could easily move the ksDup inside the `if` (if we use `if` instead of `while`, which we should probably recommend anyway).

Reviewer 2: > No idea what this is supposed to mean...

A "won't" was missing in the sentence. I'll reexplain in more detail: Currently, earlier kdbSet from other processes will make kdbSet from our own process failing. If you call `kdbGet`, however, nothing fails and you simply pull in the changes from the other process.

Previous situation:

```
Process A                |           Process B
kdbSet() -> succeeds     |
                         |  kdbSet() -> fails with conflict
```

IIUC new situation:

```
Process A                |           Process B
kdbSet() -> succeeds     |
                         |  kdbGet() -> pulls in updates from Process A
                         |  kdbSet() -> succeeds
```

But there is no guarantee for that to happen, obviously also following could happen, even if kdbGet is directly before kdbSet:

```
Process A                |           Process B
                         |  kdbGet() -> NOP
kdbSet() -> succeeds     |
                         |  kdbSet() -> fails with conflict
```

So conflict handling would become more complicated, as there are two scenarios.

Reviewer: > We are discussing about restrictions in sequences, so for me the question comes up if these examples still would work.

This option would put a restriction on the `parentKey`. That would not affect the 3-way merge example, because clearly you'll always use the same `parentKey` (at least the same name, if not pointer-equal).

> one could easily move the ksDup inside the if

Pretty sure the `ksDup` only exists to make cleanup easier.

> if we use if instead of while, which we should probably recommend anyway)

No, the `while` make sense. There could be repeated conflicts (e.g. if multiple process try to write at the same time).

Reviewer: > So conflict handling would become more complicated, as there are two scenarios.

I don't see what changed. Everything you described should also apply equally to the current situation and to the new situation using option 2 or 3 from this decision. The only difference is in the "new situation" there is a new way for `kdbSet` to fail. When the keyset/parentKey doesn't match. But that is resolved just like the existing conflicts you described. Call `kdbGet` again (this time use the correct keyset) and try `kdbSet` once more.

See also https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/pull/4574#issuecomment-1297391738

> It is wrong as it is, as the loop only makes sense if kdbSet failed because of an conflict, which isn't necessarily the case in this code.

But that doesn't actually make the `while` wrong. That only means there is a missing `if (hasConflict)` _around_ the `while`.

> But there are even two ksDup in this example:
> 
> https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/blob/664bc1d21410afe92dfc3eb9b5921a017176e8fa/examples/kdbset.c#L63
> 
> And this second one is needed to have theirs and ours.

1. This comment chain is still on option 2, where the `parentKey` must match the previous `kdbSet`. Which makes the solution much simpler than for option 3. But again, see https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/pull/4574#issuecomment-1297391738 for a solution that should also work for this option 2.
2. I'm 99% sure in the current `master` situation the example doesn't need this `ksDup` at all. At least not for 3-way merge reasons. It could just be `theirs = ksNew (0, KS_END)` if `kdbGet` would work as expected (It doesn't see [`doc/decisions/internal_cache.md`](https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/blob/514319e26cfb62c3577df99d167985ecf9036d13/doc/decisions/internal_cache.md#fewer-keys)).

> We couldn't get it within the loop if we would have done the kdbGet already before kdbSet, at least in situation (1) of process examples above.

I think https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/pull/4574#issuecomment-1297391738 should also cover this.

Reviewer 2: Very messy discussion (also my fault), @atmaxinger please update the decision and let us go from there.

Reviewer: A good example of why I suggested in https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/pull/4562#discussion_r1010366283 that longer discussions should be moved to the root thread.

Author: Oh god ... where to even begin with summarizing this ...

Reviewer 2: > Oh god ... where to even begin with summarizing this ...

This is why it is so important to constantly update and also lead discussions to directions that actually clarify questions relevant for you.

   - Doing `keyCopy (handle->lastGetParent, parentKey, KEY_CP_NAME)` in `kdbGet`
   - And checking `keyIsSameOrBelow (handle->lastGetParent, parentKey) == 1` in `kdbSet`

> 3. Enforce that `ks` used in `kdbSet` is the same as in the last `kdbGet`

Reviewer 2: This ties a KDB to one ks, which is imho a too strong coupling.

Reviewer: > This ties a KDB to one ks, which is imho a too strong coupling.

Can you give more details on this opinion? IMO tied a `KDB` to exactly one `KeySet *` (via option 4) make things much simpler for everybody and makes the API very clear to users. The data is owned by the `KDB` instance, so you shouldn't expect anything that `KDB` doesn't tell you.

Are there specific use cases where you using a separate `KDB` per `KeySet` is not possible?

Reviewer 2: Of course it would be always possible if performance and memory does not matter. One problem is that kdbOpen is expensive.

The other problem is: It is quite often the case to have two different configs (or more), e.g., one which might get written (could be called state) and another one only read at startup. I think it is a nice design if these different configs are actually in different KeySets.

Author: > It is quite often the case to have two different configs (or more), e.g., one which might get written (could be called state) and another one only read at startup. I think it is a nice design if these different configs are actually in different KeySets.

There is nothing preventing you from doing this in this alternative. You only have to call `kdbGet` for your state immediately (*)  before you call `kdbSet` to write it, that's all.

I think you both are mixing this up with alternative 4 .... (you commented on alternative 3)

(*) by immediately I mean that you can not do a `kdbGet` for another part of the KDB in the meantime

   Similar to (2), but we check for the pointer of the `KeySet` instead of having a copy of the parent key, which saves some memory.

   - Adding a `KeySet * lastGetKs` to `struct _KDB`
   - Doing `handle->lastGetKs = ks` in `kdbGet`
   - And checking `lastGetKs == ks` in `kdbSet`

4. Change the API so that a single instance of KDB can only contain a single instance of a `KeySet`.
   This solution completely eliminates problematic sequences.
   ```c
   // same as before but uses handle->data instead of the ks argument
   int kdbGet (KDB * handle, Key * parentKey);
   // same as before but uses handle->data instead of the ks argument
   int kdbSet (KDB * handle, Key * parentKey);

   KeySet * kdbData (KDB * handle) {
       return handle->data;
   }
   ```

> 

Reviewer 2: IIRC there was also some idea of storing each previous parent key somewhere, so that we neither have to change the API nor have more illegal sequences as we currently have. Did I misunderstand?

Author: Yes, this is a possibility. But we need to check every plugin whether it implicitly assumes that `kdbSet` always follows `kdbGet` for the same parent key. If it does, we then need to add this 'workaround'.

Author: I've now made this alternative 5.

# KDB operation sequences

## Problem

The current public API allows various kind of sequences of `kdbGet` and `kdbSet` calls.

> There is no real guideline of allowed and/or prohibited sequences, other than `kdbGet` for a certain parent key must be called before `kdbSet` on the same key.

Reviewer: Specifically, the current constraints are

https://github.com/ElektraInitiative/libelektra/blob/d1a8f828fea2ad77c612df62009764beb397d273/src/libs/elektra/kdb.c#L2194-L2196

While researching ways to do change tracking, we discovered that some sequences are currently legal, but might be problematic.
This issue not only effects change tracking, but may cause problems for other use cases too.

```c
Key * keyA = ...;
Key * keyB = ...;
// assume that neither A below B nor B below A
KeySet * a = ...;
KeySet * b = ...;
kdbGet(kdb, a, keyA); // (A)
kdbGet(kdb, b, keyB); // (B)
kdbSet(kdb, a, keyA); // (C)
```

- At point `(A)` the plugins internally store the KeySet for key `a`
- At point `(B)` the plugins internally override the stored the KeySet with the KeySet for key `b`
- At point `(C)` they will generate a wrong changeset for key `a`

## Constraints

> 1.
> 2.
> 3.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- As far as possible, we must check for illegal sequences and raise an error when a constraint is violated
```

## Assumptions

1.
2.
3.

## Considered Alternatives

> 1. Document which sequences are allowed.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Document which sequences are allowed without raising errors in all illegal cases.
```
